---
layout: post
title: "Engineers should hate capitalism"
subtitle: "a bug not a feature"
author: "Will Stedden"
category: commentary
---


As an engineer, maker or DIY person you quickly learn to hate disposable goods.  You might have a $1000 piece of electronics that's completely useless because of a broken part that costs 50 cents but that you can't buy on its own.

Then you eventually learn about planned obsolescence and how making things disposable is necessary for capitalism.
At that point most engineers get kind of angry at the inefficiency and curse the MBA bros who came up with that idea. But we don't actually unpack how tremendously detrimental that is to ourselves and to the world.

So take your dishwasher. Given the value of your time today there's only so much you'd pay for a dishwasher in the short term.  And that sort of sets the price Maytag can charge for a dishwasher.  But here's the thing even though they could make a dishwasher that lasts 50-100 years with minor maintenance since they can only charge so much, they can only make so much money before everyone in the US has a dishwasher. And this is where planned obsolescence comes from. The build it shitty so it will break down in 5-10 years so you and everybody else has to buy another one.

But do you know what really sucks.  That this problem only exists because of income inequality.  You see Maytag could just make a product that lasts a long time, and then after they've sold a billion washing machines to all the Americans and Europeans they'd have 7 billion more people to sell their machines to.

But here's the thing. Maytag cannot sell a washing machine to someone who won't even make $500 this year. And that happens to be x% of the world. 

See I'm a socialist because the world would actually be better if we spread the wealth.  More people would have their quality of life raised by getting something as life-changing as a dishwasher, and the rest of us wouldn't have to put up with being resold the same goddam dishwasher every 5 years because Maytag has to turn a profit from the same 300k people over and over. 